doc: openAIChat (#63)
matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab: doc/functions/openAIChat.md

# openAIChat

Connect to OpenAI™ Chat Completion API

# Creation
## Syntax

`chat = openAIChat`

`chat = openAIChat(systemPrompt)`

`chat = openAIChat(___,ApiKey=key)`

`chat = openAIChat(___,Name=Value)`

## Description

> Connect to the OpenAI™ Chat Completion API to generate text using large language models developed by OpenAI.

Reviewer: Now we have the ™ twice on this page.
```suggestion
Connect to the OpenAI Chat Completion API to generate text using large language models developed by OpenAI.
```

`chat = openAIChat` creates an `openAIChat` object. Connecting to the OpenAI API requires a valid API key. Either set the environment variable `OPENAI_API_KEY` or specify the `APIKey` name\-value argument.

`chat = openAIChat(``systemPrompt``)` creates an `openAIChat` object with the specified system prompt.

`chat = openAIChat(___,APIKey=key)` uses the specified API key. 

`chat = openAIChat(___,``Name=Value``)` specifies additional options using one or more name\-value arguments.

## Input Arguments
### `systemPrompt` \- System prompt

character vector | string scalar

The system prompt is a natural\-language description that provides the framework in which a large language model generates its responses. The system prompt can include instructions about tone, communications style, language, etc. 

**Example**: "You are a helpful assistant who provides answers to user queries in iambic pentameter."

## Name\-Value Arguments
### `APIKey` \- OpenAI API key

character vector | string scalar

OpenAI API key to access OpenAI APIs such as ChatGPT. 

> Instead of using the `APIKey` name\-value argument, you can also set the environment variable OPEN\_API\_KEY. For more information, see [https://github.com/matlab\-deep\-learning/llms\-with\-matlab/blob/main/doc/OpenAI.md](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/doc/OpenAI.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of using the `APIKey` name\-value argument, you can also set the environment variable `OPEN_API_KEY`. For more information, see [the OpenAI overview documentation](../OpenAI.md).
```

> Instead of using the `APIKey` name\-value argument, you can also set the environment variable OPEN\_API\_KEY. For more information, see [https://github.com/matlab\-deep\-learning/llms\-with\-matlab/blob/main/doc/OpenAI.md](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/doc/OpenAI.md).

Author: For the API credentials: yes, I think that is a very good idea, just not on this page! I have created an issue to keep track of the suggestion, and will think about how to incorporate it - probably actually in the main readme, or in all three <third-party-API>.md pages.

### `ModelName` \- Model name

`"gpt-4o-mini"` (default) | `"gpt-4"` | `"gpt-3.5-turbo"` | `"dall-e-2"` | ...

Name of the OpenAI model to use for text or image generation.

For a list of currently supported models, see [https://github.com/matlab\-deep\-learning/llms\-with\-matlab/blob/main/doc/OpenAI.md](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/doc/OpenAI.md).

### `Temperature` \- Temperature

`1` (default) | numeric scalar between `0` and `2`

Temperature value for controlling the randomness of the output. Higher temperature increases the randomness of the output. Setting the temperature to `0` results in fully deterministic output.

### `TopP` \- Top probability mass

`1` (default) | numeric scalar between `0` and `1`

> Top probability mass for controlling the diversity of the generated output. Higher top probability mass corresponds to higher diversity.

Author: How about "Top probability mass for controlling the diversity of the generated output using top-p sampling. Higher top probability mass corresponds to higher diversity."? This does not mention nucleus sampling, but top-p sampling should be googleable enough!

### `Tools` \- OpenAI functions to use during output generation 

`openAIFunction` object | array of `openAIFunction` objects

> Custom functions used by the model to process its input and output.

Author: Fixed

### `StreamFun` \- Custom streaming function

function handle

Specify a custom streaming function to process the generated output token by token as it is being generated, rather than having to wait for the end of the generation. For example, you can use this function to print the output as it is generated.

**Example:** `@(token) fprint("%s",token)`

### `ResponseFormat` \- Response format

`"text"` (default) | `"json"`

Format of generated output.

If you set the response format to `"text"`, then the generated output is a string.

If you set the response format to `"json"`, then the generated output is a JSON (\*.json) file. This option is not supported for these models:

-  `ModelName="gpt-4"` 
-  `ModelName="gpt-4-0613"` 

To configure the format of the generated JSON file, describe the format using natural language and provide it to the model either in the system prompt or as a user message. For an example, see [Analyze Sentiment in Text Using ChatGPT in JSON Mode](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/examples/AnalyzeSentimentinTextUsingChatGPTinJSONMode.md). 

> # Properties

Author: This is an on-going discussion in doc! 

The problem is that the name-value arguments and the properties overlap, but are not fully identical, nor is one a subset of the other. So the question becomes, how best to communicate this clearly? We want people to be able to tell easily what they can set via NV argument, and we also want people to tell easily what properties this object has.

A somewhat out-of-model option would be to have: 
Name-value arguments that do not correspond to properties
Properties settable at construction
Properties not settable at construction

This would have the advantage that no information would need to be repeated. For clarity, I could also add "chat = openAIChat(___,Property=value)" to the supported syntaxes. The disadvantage would be that this is out of model for the documentation. I'm not opposed to this, but would like to have a conversation about this in a team meeting. (I would also have to come up with better section titles - the above are just to illustrate the concept).

This property is read\-only.

If the OpenAI server does not respond within the timeout, then the function throws an error.

### `ResponseFormat` \- Response format

`"text"` (default) | `"json"`

This property is read\-only.

Format of generated output.

If the response format is `"text"`, then the generated output is a string.

If the response format is `"json"`, then the generated output is a JSON (\*.json) file. This option is not supported for these models:

-  `ModelName="gpt-4"` 
-  `ModelName="gpt-4-0613"` 

To configure the format of the generated JSON file, describe the format using natural language and provide it to the model either in the system prompt or as a user message. For an example, see [Analyze Sentiment in Text Using ChatGPT in JSON Mode](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/examples/AnalyzeSentimentinTextUsingChatGPTinJSONMode.md). 

### `FunctionNames` \- Names of OpenAI functions to use during output generation

string array

This property is read\-only.

Names of the custom functions specified in the `Tools` name\-value argument.

# Object Functions

`generate` \- Generate text

# Examples
## Create OpenAI Chat
```matlab

> modelName = "gpt-3.5-turbo";

Reviewer: We may not want to create new examples with 3.5. `"gpt-4o-mini"` is cheaper to use and generally considered on par or better.

Author: Fixed

chat = openAIChat("You are a helpful assistant awaiting further instructions.",ModelName=modelName)
```
## Generate and Stream Text
```matlab
sf = @(x) fprintf("%s",x);
chat = openAIChat(StreamFun=sf);
generate(chat,"Why is a raven like a writing desk?")
```

> # See Also
> -  [Create Simple Chat Bot](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/examples/CreateSimpleChatBot.md) 
> -  [Process Generated Text in Real Time Using ChatGPT in Streaming Mode](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/examples/ProcessGeneratedTextinRealTimebyUsingChatGPTinStreamingMode.md) 
> -  [Analyze Scientific Papers Using Function Calls](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/examples/AnalyzeScientificPapersUsingFunctionCalls.md) 
> -  [Analyze Sentiment in Text Using ChatGPT in JSON Mode](https://github.com/matlab-deep-learning/llms-with-matlab/blob/main/examples/AnalyzeSentimentinTextUsingChatGPTinJSONMode.md) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# See Also
-  [Create Simple Chat Bot](../../examples/CreateSimpleChatBot.md) 
-  [Process Generated Text in Real Time Using ChatGPT in Streaming Mode](../../examples/ProcessGeneratedTextinRealTimebyUsingChatGPTinStreamingMode.md) 
-  [Analyze Scientific Papers Using Function Calls](../../examples/AnalyzeScientificPapersUsingFunctionCalls.md) 
-  [Analyze Sentiment in Text Using ChatGPT in JSON Mode](../../examples/AnalyzeSentimentinTextUsingChatGPTinJSONMode.md) 
```

`chat = openAIChat(___,Name=Value)` specifies additional options using one or more name\-value arguments.

`chat = openAIChat(___,PropertyName=PropertyValue)` specifies properties that are settable at construction using one or more name\-value arguments.

> 

Reviewer: Listing both seems potentially confusing.

Author: Fixed!

## Input Arguments

### `systemPrompt` – System prompt

character vector | string scalar

Specify the system prompt and set the `SystemPrompt` property. The system prompt is a natural\-language description that provides the framework in which a large language model generates its responses. The system prompt can include instructions about tone, communications style, language, etc. 

**Example**: "You are a helpful assistant who provides answers to user queries in iambic pentameter."

## Name\-Value Arguments

### `APIKey` – OpenAI API key

character vector | string scalar

OpenAI API key to access OpenAI APIs such as ChatGPT. 

Instead of using the `APIKey` name\-value argument, you can also set the environment variable OPEN\_API\_KEY. For more information, see [OpenAI API](../OpenAI.md).

> ---

Reviewer: These lines look heavier in the preview than the section break for “Properties Settable at Construction” below.

### `Tools` – OpenAI functions to use during output generation 

> `openAIFunction` object | array of `openAIFunction` objects

Reviewer: I thought doc agreed that scalars are arrays?

Author: I agree this is technically redundant, but still think it's helpful (because otherwise users may think they have to put their single function object inside square brackets, for example).

Custom functions used by the model to collect or generate additional data.

For an example, see [Analyze Scientific Papers Using ChatGPT Function Calls](../../examples/AnalyzeScientificPapersUsingFunctionCalls.md). 

> ## Properties Settable at Construction

Reviewer: `Tools` is such a property, I think?

(Looks like I cannot give a proposal to submit because of the deleted line in between. I recommend moving “Tools” down into this section.)

Author: I don't think Tools is a property (so far as the user is concerned), only FunctionNames. You can't access "chat.Tools", for example ("No public property 'Tools' for class 'openAIChat'.").

Reviewer: Sorry, you're right. The `Tools` property is not exposed to the user, for whatever reason.

Optionally specify these properties at construction using name-value arguments. Specify `PropertyName1=PropertyValue1,...,PropertyNameN=PropertyValueN`, where `PropertyName` is the property name and `PropertyValue` is the corresponding value.

### `ModelName` – Model name

`"gpt-4o-mini"` (default) | `"gpt-4"` | `"gpt-3.5-turbo"` | `"dall-e-2"` | ...

Name of the OpenAI model to use for text or image generation.

For a list of currently supported models, see [OpenAI API](../OpenAI.md).

---

### `Temperature` – Temperature

`1` (default) | numeric scalar between `0` and `2`

Temperature value for controlling the randomness of the output. Higher temperature increases the randomness of the output. Setting the temperature to `0` results in fully deterministic output.

---

### `TopP` – Top probability mass

`1` (default) | numeric scalar between `0` and `1`

Top probability mass for controlling the diversity of the generated output using top-p sampling. Higher top probability mass corresponds to higher diversity.

---

### `StopSequences` – Stop sequences

> `""` (default) | string array with between `1` and `4` elements

Reviewer: Why do we want the numbers in monospace? Also, the default is an empty string array, not the one-element string with no characters.

```suggestion
`[]` (default) | string array with between zero and four elements
```

Author: Fixed "" -> [] and 1 -> 0. The numbers are in monospace for consistency - if the string array had x elements, then x would be in monospace, too!

Names of the custom functions specified in the `Tools` name\-value argument.

# Object Functions

`generate` – Generate text

# Examples
## Create OpenAI Chat
```matlab
modelName = "gpt-4o-mini";
chat = openAIChat("You are a helpful assistant awaiting further instructions.",ModelName=modelName);
```

## Generate and Stream Text
```matlab
sf = @(x) fprintf("%s",x);
chat = openAIChat(StreamFun=sf);

> generate(chat,"Why is a raven like a writing desk?");

Reviewer: Generating text and discarding the output without saving it anywhere seems a bit pointless. Can we remove the semicolon?

Author: We can; do you want me to actually generate some text and also print the output?

Reviewer: Possibly? Maybe faked or with an elision, so it doesn't get too long?
